---
layout: post
title:  "NSQ"
date:   2020-02-28 10:10:00
categories: software
---

## concepts

a stream of data is called a **topic**

a topic has one or more **channels**. Each channel receives a copy of all messages. In practice a channel maps to a downstream service consuming a topic.

a channel can have multiple clients connected which maps to the load balancing concept of a classic queue.

topics and channels are created at first use by publishing or subscribing.

a client is connected to all nsqd instaces that provide the given topic.

### distributed

high-availability and no single point of failure

### durability

by default messages are kept in memory but if `--mem-queue-size` is set to 0 all messages are persisted to disk

### delivery

messages are delivered at least once. in failure scenarios messages can be delivered multiple times and client needs to take care.

### order

you **cannot** rely on the order of messages


## components

### nsqd

the daemon that receives, queues, and delivers messages to clients

It can be run standalone but is normally configured in a cluster with nsqlookupd instance(s)

It listens on two TCP ports, one for clients and another for the HTTP API. It can optionally listen on a third port for HTTPS.

### nsqlookupd

clients query nsqlookupd to discover which nsqd instance produces the given topic

nsqd broadcasts discovery information to nsqlookupd

### nsqadmin

a Web UI to view aggregated cluster stats in realtime and perform various administrative tasks.

### utilities

**nsql\_tail** Consumes the specified topic/channel and writes to stdout

**nsq\_to\_http** Consumes the specified topic/channel and performs HTTP requests (GET/POST) to the specified endpoints

**to\_nsq** takes a std stream, splits on newlines (or other) and publishes the strings to nsq as messages


## starting a local cluster with docker

pull the image: `docker pull nsqio/nsq`

in the following commands **replace the given IP address with your OWN IP ADDRESS**

start three docker containers:

```
docker run -p 4160:4160 -p 4161:4161 nsqio/nsq /nsqlookupd
docker run -p 4150:4150 -p 4151:4151 nsqio/nsq /nsqd --lookupd-tcp-address=192.168.178.22:4160 --broadcast-address=192.168.178.22
docker run -p 4171:4171 nsqio/nsq /nsqadmin --lookupd-http-address=192.168.178.22:4161
```

now you can open the admin console: [http://127.0.0.1:4171/](http://127.0.0.1:4171/)

## using the system

### HTTP API

http can be used for publishing messages but not for consuming messages

publish a message:

```
curl -d "content of message" 127.0.0.1:4151/pub?topic=checkins
```

### consuming messages from shell

install `nsq\_tail` 

download: [https://github.com/nsqio/nsq/releases](https://github.com/nsqio/nsq/releases)

and `sudo cp ~/Downloads/nsq-1.2.0.linux-amd64.go1.12.9/bin/nsq_tail /usr/local/bin`

then:

```
nsq_tail --lookupd-http-address=127.0.0.1:4161 --topic=checkins
```

optionaly add `2> /dev/null` to see message text only

### client libraries

are listed here: [https://nsq.io/clients/client\_libraries.html](https://nsq.io/clients/client\_libraries.html)

of course I prefer Go but here is consumer written in Java:

```java
NSQLookup lookup = new DefaultNSQLookup();
lookup.addLookupAddress("localhost", 4161);
NSQConsumer consumer = new NSQConsumer(lookup, "speedtest", "dustin", (message) -> {
        System.out.println("received: " + message);            
        //now mark the message as finished.
        message.finished();
        
        //or you could requeue it, which indicates a failure and puts it back on the queue.
        //message.requeue();
});
        
consumer.start();
```
