---
layout: post
title:  "The Go Programming Language"
date:   2017-01-13 17:30:00
categories: book
---

By Alan A. A. Donovan and Brian W. Kernighan


* TOC
{:toc}

## Preface

The goals of language were to be 

* expressive

* efficient in both compilation and execution

* effective in writing reliable and robust programs


Go has become popular as a replacement for untyped scripting languages because it is faster and leads to fewer crashes due to unexpected type errors.

It is especially well suited for building infrastructure like networked servers or tools for programmers, but as a general purpose language it finds use in many areas like e.g. mobile applications or machine learning.


### Origins

Go is influenced by the languages [C](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C_%28programming_language%29), [Oberon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oberon_%28programming_language%29) and [communicating sequential processes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communicating_sequential_processes)

The most important influence from C is the emphasis on programs that __compile to efficient machine code__ and __cooperate naturally with the abstractions of the operating system__ further it's expression syntax, control-flow statements, basic data types, call-by-value parameter passing and pointers.

Oberon influenced the syntax for packages, imports and method declarations.

Another lineage among Go's ancestors is a sequence of little known research languages developed at Bell Labs (!), which are inspired by Tony Hoare's communicating sequential processe.

The concept of lexical scope with nested functions is from Scheme.


### The Go Project

The philosophy of the languages creators is to achieve simplicity. As Rob Pike put it: "complexity is multiplicative" - fixing a problem by making one part of system more complex slowly but surely adds complexity to other parts. Only through simplicity of design can a system remain stable, secure, and coherent as it grows.

Go encourages an awareness of computer system design. Especially the importance of **locality** in order achieve a good cpu **cache hit ratio**. Aggregate type (array and struct) hold their elements directly, requiring less storage and fewer allocations and pointer indirections than languages that use indirect fields.

Because the modern computer is a parallel machine, Go has lightweight threads or **goroutines**. These have a variable stack size which is initially small enough to make their creation cheap, so creating e.g. a million of them is practical.


## 1. Tutorial

This chapter shows some examples doing useful things as quckly as possible.

### Unix Commands

As a teaser, the reader is shown how to implement some famous unix commands with very few lines of code. Among these are [echo](https://github.com/adonovan/gopl.io/blob/master/ch1/echo3/main.go) and [curl](https://github.com/adonovan/gopl.io/blob/master/ch1/fetch/main.go).

### Animated GIFs

Another example is to programmaticly create animated GIF images showing [lissajous](https://github.com/adonovan/gopl.io/blob/master/ch1/lissajous/main.go).

### Web Server

With Go's standard library, a [web server](https://github.com/adonovan/gopl.io/blob/master/ch1/server3/main.go) can be created easily.


## 2. Program Structure

Go has 25 **keywords**:

| *break*    | *default*     | *func*   | *interface* | *select* |
| *case*     | *defer*       | *go*     | *map*       | *struct* |
| *chan*     | *else*        | *goto*   | *package*   | *switch* |
| *const*    | *fallthrough* | *if*     | *range*     | *type*   |
| *continue* | *for*         | *import* | *return*    | *var*    |

Built-ins:

| **Constants** | *true* *false* *iota* *nil*                               |
|               |                                                           |
| **Types**     | *int* *int8* *int16* *int32* *int64*                      |
|               | *uint* *uint8* *uint16* *uint32* *uint64* *uintptr*       |
|               | *float32* *float64* *complex128* *complex64*              |
|               | *bool* *byte* *rune* *string* *error*                     |
|               |                                                           |
| **Functions** | *make* *len* *cap* *new* *append* *copy* *close* *delete* |
|               | *complex* *real* *imag*                                   |
|               | *panic* *recover*                                         |
