---
layout: post
title:  "AWS Lambda"
date:   2020-07-15 06:00:00
categories: aws
---

* TOC
{:toc}

AWS Lambda is a compute service that lets you run code without provisioning or managing servers.

## Events

It can run your code in response to events: 

* changes to data in an Amazon S3 bucket
* or an Amazon DynamoDB table 
* a Message in a SQS Queue or
* a HTTP Request to API Gateway

## Permissions

### Execution Role

An AWS Lambda function's execution role grants it permission to access AWS services and resources. You provide this role when you create a function, and Lambda assumes the role when your function is invoked. 

## Invoking Function

### Syncronous Invocation

When you invoke a function synchronously, Lambda runs the function and waits for a response. Possible from:

* cli
* API Gateway

### Asynchronous Invocation

When you invoke a function asynchronously, you don't wait for a response from the function code.

This can be done from:

* S3
* SNS
* cli with `--invocation-type Event`

The Response can then be send to a **Destination**. Possible are:

* SQS
* SNS
* Another Lambda
* Eventbridge

### Event Source Mapping

An event source mapping is an AWS Lambda resource that reads from an event source and invokes a Lambda function. Sources are:

* SQS
* DynamoDB
* Kinesis

## Managing Functions

### Versions

You can publish a new version of a function for beta testing without affecting users of the stable production version.

You can change the function code and settings only on the unpublished version of a function. In the console there an Action to **Publish new version**.

**Qulified ARN**: `arn:aws:lambda:aws-region:acct-id:function:helloworld:$LATEST`

**Unqualified ARN**: `arn:aws:lambda:aws-region:acct-id:function:helloworld`

### Environment Variables

An environment variable is a pair of strings that are stored in a function's version-specific configuration.

The Runtime sets:

`AWS_LAMBDA_FUNCTION_NAME`

`AWS_LAMBDA_FUNCTION_MEMORY_SIZE`

`AWS_LAMBDA_FUNCTION_VERSION`

`AWS_LAMBDA_LOG_GROUP_NAME`, `AWS_LAMBDA_LOG_GROUP_NAME`

`AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`, `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`, `AWS_SESSION_TOKEN`

### Concurrency

When your function is invoked, Lambda allocates an instance of it to process the event. If the function is invoked again while a request is still being processed, another instance is allocated, which increases the function's **concurrency**.

Concurrency is subject to a Regional limit.

To ensure that a function can always reach a certain level of concurrency, you can configure the function with **reserved concurrency**.

By allocating **provisioned concurrency** before an increase in invocations, you can ensure that all requests are served by initialized instances with very low latency. Of course this comes with extra costs.

### Aliases

You can create one or more aliases for your AWS Lambda function. A Lambda alias is like a pointer to a specific Lambda function version. Users can access the function version using the alias ARN.

`PROD` or `DEV` might be good aliases

With **alias routing** you can do canary testing so a new version gets a low weight of the traffic.

### Layers

A layer is a ZIP archive that contains libraries, a custom runtime, or other dependencies.

Layers let you keep your deployment package small, which makes development easier.

For Node.js, Python, and Ruby functions this enables the web console for development it the deployment package stays under 3MB.

### Network

Connect your function to the VPC to access private resources during execution.

