---
layout: post
title:  "consul"
date:   2019-02-05 10:00:00
categories: devops
---

* TOC
{:toc}

## Running the Consul Agent

### Starting the Agent

Consul can be startet in development mode where it does not persist any state:

```bash
consul agent -dev
```

the log shows that the agent is running in server mode and is leader of the cluster.

### Cluster Members

```bash
consul members
```

Shows the members of the consul cluster. The output is based on the gossip protocol and eventually consistent.

For a strongly consistent view **HTTP** is used, which is forwarded to the server:

```bash
curl localhost:8500/v1/catalog/nodes
```

Additionaly **DNS** can be used to query:

```bash
dig @127.0.0.1 -p 8600 my-hostname.node.consul
```

### Stopping the Agent

The agent can be gracefully stopped with `ctrl-c` (the interrupt signal).

So cluster members are informed that the node **left**

If one would forcibly kill the agent, it would ne detected as **failed**.

This would lead to reconnect attempts.


## Registering Services

### Defining a Service

A service can be registered by providing a definition in the config directory or using the HTTP API.

We write a service definition configuration file:

```bash
echo '{"service": {"name": "web", "tags": ["rails"], "port": 80}}' > /etc/consul.d/web.json
```

Then restart the agent providing the config dir:

```bash
consul agent -dev -config-dir=./consul.d
```

### Querying a Service

Can be done via DNS or HTTP API

#### DNS

The DNS Name for a service is  `NAME.service.consul`.

```bash
dig @127.0.0.1 -p 8600 web.service.consul
```

Will return an A-Record for the service.

The whole address / port combination can be queried as a `SRV` record:

```bash
dig @127.0.0.1 -p 8600 web.service.consul SRV
```

Services can be filtered by tag in the format `TAG.NAME.service.consul` :

```bash
dig @127.0.0.1 -p 8600 rails.web.service.consul
```

#### HTTP API

Additionaly the HTTP API can be used to query services:

```bash
curl http://localhost:8500/v1/catalog/service/web
```

The catalog API gives all nodes of service but sometimes one may want just healthy instances.
This can be queried too:

```bash
curl 'http://localhost:8500/v1/health/service/web?passing'
```

### Updating Services

You can change service configuration files and send a `SIGHUP` to the agent.

Alternatively the HTTP API can be used to add, remove and modify services.


## Consul cluster with Vagrant

The vagrant file can be found [here](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/tree/master/demo/vagrant-cluster)

Change "debian/stretch64" to "generic/debian9"

Boot the machines with `vagrant up` and ssh with `vagrant ssh n1`

```bash
consul agent -server -bootstrap-expect=1 \
    -data-dir=/tmp/consul -node=agent-one -bind=172.20.20.10 \
    -enable-script-checks=true -config-dir=/etc/consul.d
```

Each node in a cluster must have a unique name. By default, Consul uses the hostname of the machine, but we'll manually override it using the `-node`

Now connect to the second node `vagrant ssh n2`

And run a consul agent like this:

```bash
consul agent -data-dir=/tmp/consul -node=agent-two \
    -bind=172.20.20.11 -enable-script-checks=true -config-dir=/etc/consul.d
```

But the two agents don't know each other yet, which can be seen with `consul members`

In order to join open another shell with `vagrant ssh n1` and do:

```bash
consul join 172.20.20.11
consul members
```

or use a JSON config for agent-two:

```json
{
  "start_join": ["172.20.20.10"]
}
```


## KV Data

Consul provides an easy to use KV store:

```bash
consul kv put redis/config/minconns 1
consul kv put redis/config/maxconns 25
```

```bash
consul kv get -recurse
```

```bash
consul kv delete -recurse redis
```


## Web UI

Consul comes with a Web UI that can be enabled:

```bash
consul agent -dev -ui
```

It can be reached here: [http://localhost:8500/ui](http://localhost:8500/ui)